Add CEO diary post on training AI models (#16940)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/training-AI-models.md

---
date: 2026-05-20
title: Why we want to train AI models
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - james-hawkins
featuredImage: >-

>   https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png

Author: TODO: Add new header image

featuredImageType: full
category: CEO diaries
---

Over the last year, we've started building more AI-powered features into PostHog, like our [AI installation wizard](/wizard), [PostHog AI](/docs/posthog-ai), and our [MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol). They're all wildly popular, but they're only the start.

We're now working towards building more proactive, self-driving products. Products that surface answers and solutions for you, act on them, and improve over time. This is the vision for [PostHog Code](/code), which is now in beta.

To enable this and more products like it, we want to try something new.

> We want to experiment with training models on data in PostHog, so we can build better versions of these kinds of features, and make our existing products smarter and more proactive.

Reviewer: @andyvan-ph I wonder if this is brave enough. 

I think we need to be radical in our positioning for it to take root. "A better version of existing features" doesn't feel like it's bold enough. 

```suggestion
We want to train models on data in PostHog, so we can build better versions of existing products and entirely new types of products that will help teams build better products, faster.
```

Reviewer 2: 2030 shaped software

Author: going to go through and make this a tiny bit spicier throughout

We think there are a bunch of meaningful use cases here that will help users, while also helping PostHog continue to thrive.

## What we want to build

> The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate.

Author: ```suggestion
The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying DOM data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate.
```

@jamesefhawkins sensible to just add DOM here? I assume that's what we mean by underlying data anyway.

Reviewer 2: there's more than just DOM data (mouse moves for example)

Reviewer: "cheaper, faster, and more accurate", like my comment above, feels like it's just a slightly faster and cheaper version of what we have. I think it'd be better to bring the synthetic user testing point up first, here.

We also want to explore whether we can get better at predicting user behavior, such as what changes might improve conversion rates, based on a model's knowledge of past user behavior, without needing manual analysis, or an excessive amount of tokens thrown at agents.

> The third area I'm excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using that same data to understand where users might get confused, or what flows might break, before you ship. If this works, it could reduce the amount of manual testing needed, which would help reduce the review and QA workload given the huge increase in this area because of coding model improvements.

Reviewer 2: > If this works, it could reduce the amount of manual testing needed, which would help reduce the review and QA workload given the huge increase in this area because of coding model improvements

very nitpicky... this feels like a very long sentence to me

"As coding models improve many people are seeing test and review workload increase hugely. We want to automate this to let you focus on your product."

Author: good note

> The third area I'm excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using that same data to understand where users might get confused, or what flows might break, before you ship. If this works, it could reduce the amount of manual testing needed, which would help reduce the review and QA workload given the huge increase in this area because of coding model improvements.

Author: ```suggestion
The third area I'm excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using that same data to understand where users might get confused, or what flows might break, before you ship. As coding models improve many people are seeing test and review workload increase hugely. We want to automate this, so you can focus on your product.
```

Our ideas here are experimental. It will take iteration to figure out how to train models effectively, and what data is actually useful. But, so far, every time we've added AI in a way that makes the product simpler or more powerful, it's worked well, so we think it's worth trying.

## How this will work

We've spent a lot of time thinking about this from a user perspective, especially the tradeoffs.

The upside is the kinds of improvements described above.

Most tools are focused on providing you with the best code; we want to focus our energy into making your product the best it can be. This is why we describe PostHog Code as a product editor.

The downside is that this involves using data in PostHog to train models.

Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know:

- We'll anonymize all data before it's used for training
- We'll only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
- We'll do the training ourselves. We won't sell your data to third-party model providers

> - This is optional. You can opt out at any time via TODO LINK HERE. It takes a few seconds to do so

Author: TODO: Add link to settings here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This is optional. You can opt out at any time via TODO LINK HERE. It takes one click
```

> - **Important:** Users with a BAA, DPA or MSA enterprise agreement will be opted out by default

Reviewer: We should mention we're not training on data from eu.posthog.com instances too

Reviewer: Or maybe cut this, since we repeat it immediately below?

In terms of comms, we are:

- Emailing all our customers and making it super obvious what the email is about
- Notifying all our users through in-app notifications (in case you don't read emails)

> - Communicating our plans very publicly (like in this post)

Author: ```suggestion
Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know: 

- We are opting out users on our EU cloud instance by default
- We are also opting out users with a BAA, DPA, or MSA agreement
- We are opting in all other users on our US cloud instance
- We will anonymize all data before it's used for training
- We will only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
- We will do the training ourselves
- We won't sell your data to third-parties model providers
- You can opt out at any time via TODO LINK HERE (admin required)
- Users who we have opted out by default can choose to opt in the same way

In terms of comms, we are:

- Emailing all our customers and making it super obvious what the email is about
- Notifying all our users through in-app notifications (in case you don't read emails)
- Communicating our plans very publicly (like in this post)
```

Author: @joethreepwood @nicowaltz interested in your feedback on this change. I've changed up the order to stress who we're opting out first, specifically the EU users bit since they're likely to complain the loudest / fastest.

---

> date: 2026-05-20

Author: TODO: Update date

Our ideas here are experimental. It will take iteration to figure out how to train models effectively, and what data is actually useful. But, so far, every time we've added AI in a way that makes the product simpler or more powerful, it's worked well, so we think it's worth trying.

## How this will work

We've spent a lot of time thinking about this from a user perspective, especially the tradeoffs.

The upside is the kinds of improvements described above.

Most tools are focused on providing you with the best code; we want to focus our energy into making your product the best it can be. This is why we describe PostHog Code as a product editor.

The downside is that this involves using data in PostHog to train models.

Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know in an internet-friendly numbered list: 

1. We will anonymize all data before it's used for training
2. Users on our EU cloud instance are opted out by default
3. Users with a BAA, DPA, or MSA agreement are also opted out
4. All other users on our US cloud instance are opted in by default

> 5. You can opt out at any time with a single click via TODO LINK HERE (admin required)

Author: ```suggestion
5. You can opt out at any time with a single click via your [org settings in PostHog](https://app.posthog.com/settings/organization-details) (admin access required)
```

> 5. You can opt out at any time with a single click via your [org settings in PostHog](https://app.posthog.com/settings/organization-details) (admin access required)

Author: ```suggestion
5. You can opt out at any time via your [org settings in PostHog](https://app.posthog.com/settings/organization-details) (admin access required)
```

6. We will only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
7. We will do the model training ourselves

> 8. We won't sell your data to model providers

Author: ```suggestion
8. We won't sell or send your data to model providers
```

> 8. We will do all model training ourselves

Author: ```suggestion
8. We will do all the model training ourselves
```

In terms of comms, we are:

- Emailing all our customers and making it super obvious what the email is about
- Notifying all our users through in-app notifications (in case you don't read emails)
- Communicating our plans very publicly (like in this post)

Our goal here is to improve PostHog as a product for our customers, not to expose or sell models trained on your data, or monetize your data.

## Why this is opt out, not opt in

Put simply, because otherwise we will not have enough data to train a model that's actually useful.

> If you choose to opt out, the new features that we're building with these models won't be available to you, as they'll depend on this data.

Author: ```suggestion
If you choose to opt out, the new features that we're building with these models won't be available to you, as they'll depend on this data. If you're opted out by default (e.g. because you're on our EU cloud instance), you can choose to opt in manually provided any legal agreements you have with us don't exclude this option.
```

We're now working towards building more proactive, self-driving products. Products that surface answers and solutions for you, act on them, and improve over time. This is the vision for [PostHog Code](/code), which is now in beta.

To enable this and more products like it, we want to try something new.

We want to experiment with training models on data in PostHog, so we can build better versions of these kinds of features, and make our existing products smarter and more proactive.

We think there are a bunch of meaningful use cases here that will help users, while also helping PostHog continue to thrive.

## What we want to build

The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate.

We also want to explore whether we can get better at predicting user behavior, such as what changes might improve conversion rates, based on a model's knowledge of past user behavior, without needing manual analysis, or an excessive amount of tokens thrown at agents.

> The third area I'm excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using that same data to understand where users might get confused, or what flows might break, before you ship. As coding models improve many people are seeing test and review workload increase hugely. We want to automate this, so you can focus on your product.

Author: move this first

## How this will work

We've spent a lot of time thinking about this from a user perspective, especially the tradeoffs.

The upside is the kinds of improvements described above.

Most tools are focused on providing you with the best code; we want to focus our energy into making your product the best it can be. This is why we describe PostHog Code as a product editor.

The downside is that this involves using data in PostHog to train models.

Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know in an internet-friendly numbered list: 

1. We will anonymize all data before it's used for training
2. Users on our EU cloud instance are opted out by default
3. Users with a BAA, DPA, or MSA agreement are also opted out
4. All other users on our US cloud instance are opted in by default
5. You can opt out at any time with a single click via TODO LINK HERE (admin required)
6. We will only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
7. We will do the model training ourselves

> 8. We won't sell your data to third-parties model providers

Author: @pauldambra tweaked the order again based on your feedback. i'm on the fence about what goes first, but I think this works.

---
date: 2026-05-20

> title: Why we want to train AI models

Author: ```suggestion
title: Training our own AI models
```

Author: i'd like to run with this headline as it's more in keeping with the CEO diary vibe for james' posts. any objections?

To enable this and more products like it, we want to try something new. We want to train models on data in PostHog.

## What we want to build

We have two goals here:
1. Make our existing products fit for the future – i.e. the "2030 versions" of what we already do well
2. Build entirely new products, like PostHog Code, that help teams build better products, faster

The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate. We want replays to be as powerful at scale as they are for diagnosing the problems of individual users, and we think training models will make this possible.

Another idea I'm especially excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using our knowledge of user behavior to identify when users might get confused, or what flows might break, _before you ship_ to production. As coding models improve, many people are seeing test and review workload increase hugely. We want to automate this, so you can focus on your product.

> And, if we can get better at predicting user behavior, we should also be able to suggest changes that will improve conversion rates, and reduce user frustration, with greater confidence. The better we get a this, the more you'll save on time spent doing manual analysis, and token usage. 

Author: ```suggestion
And, if we can get better at predicting user behavior, we should also be able to suggest changes that will improve conversion rates, and reduce user frustration, with greater confidence, saving you time on manual analysis and token usage,
```

Our ideas here are experimental. It will take iteration to figure out how to train models effectively, and what data is actually useful. But, so far, every time we've added AI in a way that makes the product simpler or more powerful, it's worked well, so we think it's worth trying.

## How this will work

We've spent a lot of time thinking about this from a user perspective, especially the tradeoffs.

The upside is the kinds of improvements described above.

Most tools are focused on providing you with the best code; we want to focus our energy into making your product the best it can be. This is why we describe PostHog Code as a product editor.

The downside is that this involves using data in PostHog to train models.

Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know in an internet-friendly numbered list: 

1. We are opting out users on our EU cloud instance by default
2. Users with a BAA, DPA, or MSA agreement are also opted out
3. We are opting in all other users on our US cloud instance

> 3. We will anonymize all data before it's used for training

Reviewer 2: i think we should lead with the note about anonymisation... it's my guess for the most asked question
and then EU etc etc

4. We will only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
5. We will do the model training ourselves
6. We won't sell your data to third-parties model providers
7. You can opt out at any time with a single click via TODO LINK HERE (admin required)

> 8. Users who we have opted out by default can choose to opt in the same way

Author: @hector-r-759 I could do with your eyes on this bit, just to make sure we're saying the right things.

Reviewer 2: not all orgs can opt in. if your agreement with us precludes it then we'll lock opt in so that you can't

The downside is that this involves using data in PostHog to train models.

Most companies would bury this change in a deceptively boring T&Cs update, but we value transparency, so here's what you need to know in an internet-friendly numbered list: 

1. We are opting out users on our EU cloud instance by default
2. Users with a BAA, DPA, or MSA agreement are also opted out
3. We are opting in all other users on our US cloud instance
3. We will anonymize all data before it's used for training
4. We will only use data that already exists in your PostHog instance
5. We will do the model training ourselves
6. We won't sell your data to third-parties model providers
7. You can opt out at any time with a single click via TODO LINK HERE (admin required)
8. Users who we have opted out by default can choose to opt in the same way

In terms of comms, we are:

- Emailing all our customers and making it super obvious what the email is about
- Notifying all our users through in-app notifications (in case you don't read emails)
- Communicating our plans very publicly (like in this post)

> I also want to stress that our goal here is to improve PostHog as a product for our customers, not to expose or sell models trained on your data.

Author: ```suggestion
Our goal here is to improve PostHog as a product for our customers, not to expose or sell models trained on your data.
```

Over the past year, we've started building more AI-powered features into PostHog, like our [AI installation wizard](/wizard), [PostHog AI](/docs/posthog-ai), and our [MCP](/docs/model-context-protocol). They're all wildly popular, but they're only the start.

[PostHog's next chapter](/blog/posthogs-next-chapter) is about building more proactive, self-driving products. Products that surface answers and solutions for you, act on them, and improve over time. This is the vision for [PostHog Code](/code), which is now in beta.

To enable this and more products like it, we want to try something new. We want to train models on data in PostHog.

## What we want to build

We have two goals here:
1. Make our existing products fit for the future – i.e. the "2030 versions" of what we already do well
2. Build entirely new products, like PostHog Code, that help teams build better products, faster

The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate. 

> We want replays to be as powerful at scale as they are for diagnosing the problems of individual users, and we think training models will make this possible.

Author: ```suggestion
The first area we're interested in is session replay analysis. PostHog AI can already detect issues in replays, but it's expensive and doesn't scale well. We think a model trained on the underlying data used to power replays could make this cheaper, faster, and more accurate. We want replays to be as powerful at scale as they are for diagnosing the problems of individual users, and we think training models will make this possible.
```

Another idea I'm especially excited about is synthetic user testing – i.e. using our knowledge of user behavior to identify when users might get confused, or what flows might break, _before you ship_ to production. As coding models improve, many people are seeing test and review workload increase hugely. We want to automate this, so you can focus on your product.

> And, if we can get better at predicting user behavior, we should also be able to suggest changes that might improve conversion rates, and reduce user frustration, with greater confidence, without needing manual analysis, or an excessive amount of tokens thrown at agents.

Author: ```suggestion
And, if we can get better at predicting user behavior, we should also be able to suggest changes that will improve conversion rates, and reduce user frustration, with greater confidence. The better we get a this, the more you'll save on time spent doing manual analysis, and token usage. 
```
